Data-conversion chapter (#7)
extendr/user-guide: conversion.qmd

title: "Conversion to and from R data"
---

One of the key goals with extendr, is to provide a framework that allows you to write Rust functions, that interact with R, without having to know the intricacies within R internals, or even R's C-facilities. However, this is unavoidable if one wishes to understand why the extendr-api is the way it is.

Thus, for introducing extendr, we shall mention facts about R internals, but these are not necessary to keep in mind going forward.

```{r, echo=FALSE}
# to enable extendr/extendrsrc chunks
library(rextendr)
# names(knitr::knit_engines$get())
```

A fundamental data-type in R is the 32-bit integer, `int` in C, and `i32` in Rust. Passing that type around is essential, and straight forward:

```{extendrsrc}

> #[extendr(use_try_from = true)]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#[extendr]
```

Most data in R are vectors. Scalar values are in fact 1-sized vectors, and
even lists are defined by a vector-type. A vector type in Rust is `Vec`. A
`Vec` has a type-information, length, and capacity. This means, that if necessary,
we may expand any given `Vec`-data to contain more values, and only when capacity
is exceeded, will there be a reallocation.

Naively, we may define a function like so

```{extendrsrc}
#[extendr(use_try_from = true)]
fn repeat_us(mut values: Vec<i32>) -> Vec<i32> {
    assert_eq!(values.capacity(), values.len(), "must have zero capacity left");
    values[0] = 100;
    values.push(55);
    values
}
```

```{r, error=TRUE}
x <- c(1L, 2L, 33L)
repeat_us(x)
```

Even if the argument is `mut Vec<_>`, what happens is that the R vector gets
converted to a Rust owned type, and it is that type that we can modify, and augment, with syncing to the original data.

Of course, a slice e.g. `&[i32]` / `&mut [i32]` could be used instead, and this allows us to modify the original data, i.e.

```{extendrsrc}
#[extendr(use_try_from = true)]
fn zero_middle_element(values: &mut [i32]) {
    let len = values.len();
    let middle = len / 2;
    values[middle] = 0;
}

> ```

Author: I don't see this as being dangerous or for experts only. If it was in C/C++/Rcpp or those, then maybe I'd consider calling them expert-use.

> ```

Reviewer: Well, more importantly, this doesn't compile with extendr on main or published on crates.io

```{r}
x <- c(100L, 200L, 300L)
zero_middle_element(x)
x
```

This is great! If we wanted to insert an `NA` in the middle, we would have had to operate on `&mut [Rint]` instead. 

> A limitation of slices , a slice does not allow for extending a vector with new elements. To do this, we have to rely on extendr provided types, that provide a `Vec`-like API to R's vector-types. These are called `Integers`, `Logicals`, `Doubles`, and `Strings`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A slice is a representation of a sequence of elements that are part of a larger collection. Since they represent only part of a collection (vector, in this case), we cannot add new elements to this. To do so,  we have to rely on extendr provided types, that provide a `Vec`-like API to R's vector-types. These are the `Integers`, `Logicals`, `Doubles`, and `Strings` types.
```

title: "Conversion to and from R data"
---

> One of the key goals with extendr, is to provide a framework that allows you to write Rust functions, that interact with R, without having to know the intricacies within R internals, or even R's C-facilities. However, this is unavoidable if one wishes to understand why the extendr-api is the way it is.

Reviewer 2: I think this should probably get moved to some introductory page for the entire user guide.

Might be better to start each tutorial with an itemized list of learning objectives:

> In this tutorial, we explain how to work with vectors in R:
> * passing single values to Rust and back to R
> * passing multiple values to Rust and back to R
> * working with different data types (numeric, integer, character)

Thus, for introducing extendr, we shall mention facts about R internals, but these are not necessary to keep in mind going forward.

```{r, echo=FALSE}
# to enable extendr/extendrsrc chunks
library(rextendr)
# names(knitr::knit_engines$get())
```

> A fundamental data-type in R is the 32-bit integer, `int` in C, and `i32` in Rust. Passing that type around is essential, and straight forward:

Reviewer 2: If the target audience for these tutorials is useRs (really need a better name for our community), I think it might make sense to just start with the vector data structure irrespective of data type. Then mention there's this whole thing called "type safety" that R plays fast and loose with and Rust enforces ruthlessly, which makes it a friction point for translating between the languages.

Reviewer 2: Maybe I should have started with this question: "how much background knowledge do we want to assume with these?"

```{extendrsrc}
#[extendr(use_try_from = true)]
fn ultimate_answer() -> i32 {
    return 42_i32;
}
```

> And now this function is available within your R-session, as the output is `r ultimate_answer()`.

Reviewer 2: i like starting with this example, but maybe show output using an R code chunk

````
```{r}
ultimate_answer()
```
````
